Add topic replication factor change (#101)
strimzi/proposals: 065-topic-replication-factor-change.md

Cruise Control creates a task for each operation, such as topic configuration and cluster rebalance.
A task is first created in the Active state, then moves to InExecution, and finally to Completed or CompletedWithError.
At most `max.active.user.tasks` tasks can be Active at the same time (5 by default), and only one task can be InExecution at any given time.
During the execution, a task is divided in one or more batches, which are then executed one after the other.
A task may include multiple topics and it is marked as completed once the whole task's status is Completed.

### Topic configuration

The [`topic_configuration`](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/REST-APIs#change-kafka-topic-configuration) endpoint is used to request a topic configuration update, and currently only supports replication factor changes.
Once accepted, the replication factor change is put into the Cruise Control's task queue and executed asynchronously.

The two required parameters for this endpoint are `topic` (regular expression to specify subject topics) and `replication_factor` (target replication factor).

> In order to group multiple changes in the same request to Cruise Control, the Topic Operator uses a [JSON payload](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/Change-topic-replication-factor-through-Cruise-Control#instruction) containing topics grouped by their replication factor, which replaces the required parameters.

Reviewer: "containing topics ... this could be misleading. It could mean you need topic names there, you can specify a regex instead (as for the `topic` parameter). Let's make it clearer.

Author: Right. Updated. Let me know if it's clear enough.

Reviewer: I don't know the internal details but are we sure that the payload can contain just regex like `topic1|topic2|topic3` or even more generic regex.

Author: Yes, it can contain any valid regex, but I'm illustrating our usage.

Reviewer: Sorry I read it as an overall description of the API and not referring to our usage. Maybe we can make it clearer?

Author: but it says "the Topic Operator uses..."

Reviewer: Right. That's fine then.

A task may include multiple topics and it is marked as completed once the whole task's status is Completed.

### Topic configuration

The [`topic_configuration`](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/REST-APIs#change-kafka-topic-configuration) endpoint is used to request a topic configuration update, and currently only supports replication factor changes.
Once accepted, the replication factor change is put into the Cruise Control's task queue and executed asynchronously.

The two required parameters for this endpoint are `topic` (regular expression to specify subject topics) and `replication_factor` (target replication factor).
In order to group multiple changes in the same request to Cruise Control, the Topic Operator uses a [JSON payload](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/Change-topic-replication-factor-through-Cruise-Control#instruction), which replaces the required parameters.
This JSON contains a list of replication factor values, each one associated with a regex expression of the form `topic1|topic2|topic3` matching all topics with that target replication factor.

This is useful with bulk replicas change, which can happen in some edge cases.

> A potentially big backlog of messages may be created when the Topic Operator is not running, or there is an issue with Cruise Control or Kafka.

Reviewer 2: So in this situation, the TO would make a single topic_config request to the CC API with the JSON payload specifying all the topics to be configured? 

Assuming users are making topic replication factor changes through the `KafkaTopic` resources, is the TO batching these changes during a reconciliation loop before making the request? If so, how would the batching happen on the TO side? Would the batching be based on time or number of topics, would it be configurable by users?

 Is there a way users could batch these changes on purpose?

Author: > So in this situation, the TO would make a single topic_config request to the CC API with the JSON payload specifying all the topics to be configured?

Yes.

> is the TO batching these changes during a reconciliation loop before making the request? If so, how would the batching happen on the TO side? Would the batching be based on time or number of topics, would it be configurable by users?

The batching logic is already provided by the reconciliation logic. On each iteration, it reconciles a batch of KafkaTopic events, some of which may be replicas changes, and you can tune the batch.size and linger.ms.

> Is there a way users could batch these changes on purpose?

What the user can do is to accumulate all replicas changes, and then apply them at the same time. This would produce 1 or more batches depending on batch.size and linger.ms configurations. I tried 100 replicas changes with default configurations, and it created 3 batches. This means 3 CC topic_configuration requests, plus a small number of tasks_state requests (it took something like 5 minutes to reconcile all).

| Name                                  | Type    | Default | Description                                                   |
|:--------------------------------------|---------|---------|---------------------------------------------------------------|
| STRIMZI_CRUISE_CONTROL_ENABLED        | Boolean | false   | Whether Cruise Control integration is enabled                 |
| STRIMZI_CRUISE_CONTROL_RACK_ENABLED   | Boolean | false   | Whether rack awareness is enabled in the target Kafka cluster |
| STRIMZI_CRUISE_CONTROL_HOSTNAME       | String  | ""      | Cruise Control hostname                                       |
| STRIMZI_CRUISE_CONTROL_PORT           | Integer | 9090    | Cruise Control port                                           |
| STRIMZI_CRUISE_CONTROL_SSL_ENABLED    | Boolean | false   | Whether SSL encryption is enabled                             |
| STRIMZI_CRUISE_CONTROL_AUTH_ENABLED   | Boolean | false   | Whether Basic authentication is enabled                       |

> With the Cluster Operator deployment, the certificate chain in PEM format and the admin user credentials for the Cruise Control REST API are automatically mounted in the Topic Operator container.

Reviewer 2: This is separate from the credentials for the `KafkaRebalanceOperator` right? So we would have two different admin users:
(1) KafkaRebalanceOperator
(2) UTO
It would probably be easier to implement this way and we would also know which component made which CC API request soley by the user name when looking at the CC UserTask list

Author: Yes, it's a dedicated user. Let me clarify in the proposal.

### KafkaTopic CRD changes

During the whole replicas change process the KafkaTopic remains in a ready state.
A replicas change is executed asynchronously, and takes more than one reconciliation to complete.

A new optional KafkaTopicStatus subsection called `replicasChange` is used to update the user, and keep track of the replicas change state.
The `replicasChange` can be in a pending or ongoing `state`, and it can contains a `message` in case of failure.
Other fields are `sessionId`, which maps to Cruise Control's `User-Task-ID`, and `targetReplicas`, which reflects the target replicas value (this may be different from .spec.replicas when the state is ongoing).

- **Pending**: Not in Cruise Control's task queue (not yet sent or request error).
  Cruise Control's task states: None.
  ```sh
  status:
    conditions:
    - lastTransitionTime: "2024-01-18T16:13:50.490918232Z"
      status: "True"
      type: Ready
    observedGeneration: 2
    replicasChange:
      state: pending
      targetReplicas: 2
    topicName: my-topic
  ```

- **Ongoing**: In Cruise Control's task queue, but execution not started, or not completed. 

>   Cruise Control's task states: Active, InExecution.

Reviewer 2: Would it make sense to have the `Ongoing` state match the `InExecution` state of Cruise Control and have a separate state maybe called something like `Queued` to match the state of  `CruiseControl` when the task is queued but not in execution?

Author: I though about this, but this information is not important from a TO user point of view, and it would cause additional state updates. I only added the ongoing state because the execution is asynchronous. I'm treating CC as an implementation detail here.

  ```sh
  status:
    conditions:
    - lastTransitionTime: "2024-01-18T16:13:53.490918232Z"
      status: "True"
      type: Ready
    observedGeneration: 3
    replicasChange:
      sessionId: 1aa418ca-53ed-4b93-b0a4-58413c4fc0cb
      state: ongoing
      targetReplicas: 2
    topicName: my-topic
  ```

- **Completed**: Cruise Control's task execution completed (target replication factor reconciled).
  Cruise Control's task states: Completed.
  ```sh
  status:
    conditions:
    - lastTransitionTime: "2024-01-18T16:13:58.490918232Z"
      status: "True"
      type: Ready
    observedGeneration: 4
    topicName: my-topic
  ```

- **Failed**: Cruise Control's request failed, the change remains pending, and it is periodically retried.
  Cruise Control's task states: CompletedWithError.
  ```sh
  status:
    conditions:
    - lastTransitionTime: "2024-01-18T16:13:58.490918232Z"
      status: "True"
      type: Ready
    observedGeneration: 4
    replicasChange:
      message: Change request failed, Cluster model not ready

>       state: pending

Reviewer 2: Should "pending" -> "failed" here?

Author: Technically the change is still pending, most failures are just temporary, so I decided to not use the failed state.

A completed task is retained for `completed.user.task.retention.time.ms`, which defaults to 24 hours.

### Topic configuration

The [`topic_configuration`](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/REST-APIs#change-kafka-topic-configuration) endpoint will be used to request replication factor changes.
Once accepted, the replication factor change is put into the Cruise Control's task queue and executed asynchronously.

The two required parameters for this endpoint are `topic` (regular expression to specify subject topics) and `replication_factor` (target replication factor).
In order to group multiple changes in the same request to Cruise Control, the Topic Operator uses a [JSON payload](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/Change-topic-replication-factor-through-Cruise-Control#instruction), which replaces the required parameters.
This JSON contains a list of replication factor values, each one associated with a regex expression of the form `topic1|topic2|topic3` matching all topics with that target replication factor.

This is useful with bulk replicas change, which can happen in some edge cases.

> A potentially big backlog of messages may be created when the Topic Operator is not running, or there is an issue with Cruise Control or Kafka.

Reviewer 3: I guess these are not messages but changes, events or something?

```suggestion
A potentially big backlog of changes may be created when the Topic Operator is not running, or there is an issue with Cruise Control or Kafka.
```

Author: Done.

> Host: localhost:9090
> User-Agent: curl/8.0.1
> Accept: */*
> 
} [91 bytes data]
< HTTP/1.1 200 OK
< Date: Thu, 07 Dec 2023 14:58:55 GMT
< Set-Cookie: JSESSIONID=node0lfkx183ijq4pjkkjahsegfmp30.node0; Path=/
< Expires: Thu, 01 Jan 1970 00:00:00 GMT
< User-Task-ID: 5344ca89-351f-4565-8d0f-9aade00e053d
< Content-Type: application/json;charset=utf-8
< Cruise-Control-Version: 2.5.77-SNAPSHOT
< Cruise-Control-Commit_Id: 535ea07e8847990cc02dde1f1be99b387dbeaf5b
< Content-Length: 17051
< Server: Jetty(9.4.52.v20230823)
< 
{ [17321 bytes data]
{
  "summary": {
    "numIntraBrokerReplicaMovements": 0,
    "numReplicaMovements": 125,
    "onDemandBalancednessScoreAfter": 100,
    "intraBrokerDataToMoveMB": 0,
    "monitoredPartitionsPercentage": 100,
    "provisionRecommendation": "",
    "excludedBrokersForReplicaMove": [],
    "excludedBrokersForLeadership": [],
    "provisionStatus": "RIGHT_SIZED",
    "onDemandBalancednessScoreBefore": 100,
    "recentWindows": 5,
    "dataToMoveMB": 0,
    "excludedTopics": [],
    "numLeaderMovements": 0
  }
  ...
```

The `skip_rack_awareness_check` parameter configures whether to skip the rack awareness sanity check or not (default to false).

> In case of a single-rack deployment, the Topic Operator automatically enables `skip_rack_awareness_check` to allow replication factor changes.

Reviewer 3: What is _single rack deployment_? Strimzi currently distinguishes rack awareness being _enabled_ or _disabled_. But it does not know in how many zones you are. So you can enable rack awareness even with a single zone or even single node for example. So how does this translate to Strimzi? Do you want to say that if rack awareness is not enabled in Strimzi, the `skip_rack_awareness_check` will be set to `true`?

Author: > Do you want to say that if rack awareness is not enabled in Strimzi, the skip_rack_awareness_check will be set to true

Yes, that's badly written. Let me rephrase.

|:--------------------------------------|---------|---------|---------------------------------------------------------------|
| STRIMZI_CRUISE_CONTROL_ENABLED        | Boolean | false   | Whether Cruise Control integration is enabled                 |
| STRIMZI_CRUISE_CONTROL_RACK_ENABLED   | Boolean | false   | Whether rack awareness is enabled in the target Kafka cluster |
| STRIMZI_CRUISE_CONTROL_HOSTNAME       | String  | ""      | Cruise Control hostname                                       |
| STRIMZI_CRUISE_CONTROL_PORT           | Integer | 9090    | Cruise Control port                                           |
| STRIMZI_CRUISE_CONTROL_SSL_ENABLED    | Boolean | false   | Whether SSL encryption is enabled                             |
| STRIMZI_CRUISE_CONTROL_AUTH_ENABLED   | Boolean | false   | Whether Basic authentication is enabled                       |

With the Cluster Operator deployment, the certificate chain in PEM format and the admin user credentials for the Cruise Control REST API will be automatically mounted in the Topic Operator container.

> Instead, with the standalone deployment, the user will have to mount: certificate chain in `/etc/tls-sidecar/cluster-ca-certs/ca.crt`, credentials in `/etc/eto-cc-api/cruise-control.apiToAdminUsername` and `/etc/eto-cc-api/cruise-control.apiToAdminPassword`.

Reviewer 3: What does `apiToAdminUsername` / `apiToAdminPassword` stand for? Isn't it better to name it some more expected way? `cruise-control-api.username` / `cruise-control-api.password` for example? Or what does `apiToAdmin` mean? It sounds like it is some API to communicate with some Administrator ... but that is not right. It is admin credentials to communicate with an API. So if anything, than `AdminUsernameForApi`.

Also, why not mount these as environment variables instead of files? Wouldn't that make it easier to work with?

Author: > What does apiToAdminUsername / apiToAdminPassword stand for?

Topic operator (To). I know it's not great, so I'm open to naming suggestions that make it clear that they are used by the TO.

> why not mount these as environment variables instead of files? Wouldn't that make it easier to work with

I want to maintain consistency with certificate handling.

Reviewer 3: > Topic operator (To). I know it's not great, so I'm open to naming suggestions that make it clear that they are used by the TO.

Well, we normally use Topic **O**perator => so T**O**. I think the `To` is really confusing given it has also plain English meaning - it honestly never ever came to my mind that this is supposed to mean Topic Operator and I'm using the shortcut TO daily. I would call it `cruise-control-api.username` and `cruise-control-api.password`. But if you wanna keep it, you should definitely use `TO`.

Reviewer 3: > I want to maintain consistency with certificate handling.

It is normally considered less secure with file and there seems no reason for it. I would also expect that one day the certificate handling will be reworked. But ok, if you wanna keep it its fine, I can live with it.

Another temporary example is the `RuntimeException` when Cruise Control's task queue is full.

Cruise Control allows to scale down the replication factor under the `min.insync.replicas` value, and this can cause disruption to producers with `acks=all`.
When this happens, the Topic Operator won't block the operation, but will just log a warning, because the KafkaRoller ignores topics with RF < minISR, and they don't even show up as under replicated in Kafka metrics.
The target replication factor should also be less than or equal to the number of available brokers, but this is enforced directly by Cruise Control.

When a managed KafkaTopic with replicas change is deleted in Kubernetes, the Topic Operator will also delete the topic in Kafka, but the task execution will continue in Cruise Control.
There is little benefit in using the `stop_proposal_execution` endpoint, because most replicas change tasks have only one batch that can't be stopped.
No task remains hanging, the only problem is that Cruise Control does some unnecessary work executing a batch for a topic that has been deleted.

> When a manged topic with replicas change is deleted in Kafka, the Topic Operator will recreate the topic with the target replication factor.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When a managed topic with replicas change is deleted in Kafka, the Topic Operator will recreate the topic with the target replication factor.
```

Author: Done.

When Topic Operator is restarted, both pending and ongoing replicas changes will be recovered from the KafkaTopic status.
The ongoing state will include a `sessionId`, which is the unique identifier of a Cruise Control task, which includes one or more replicas changes.

When Cruise Control is restarted, all active tasks are lost because there is no persistent memory.
The Topic Operator will detect this event when the ongoing changes check returns no tasks for a known `sessionId`.
All pending and ongoing replicas changes will still be stored in KafkaTopic status, and new tasks will be created as soon as Cruise Control becomes ready.

## Affected/not affected projects

The following components will be affected by this proposal:

- Topic Operator: this component will drive the whole replication factor change process.

> - Cluster Operator: this component will be responsible to initialize the Cruise Control environment variables.

Reviewer 3: We talked about the need to change the order of things in the CO etc. in order to achieve this. That should have its own chapter listing the expected changes.

Author: Done.

## Motivation

The topic replication factor change feature will provide a much better cloud-native experience for Strimzi users.
They will be able to change the topic replication factor by simply updating the KafkaTopic resource, which may also happen through a GitOps pipeline.

This is a non exhaustive list of use cases that will become significantly easier:

- Set a lower replication factor for non-critical topics to reduce the infrastructure costs (compute, storage and network).
- Set a lower replication factor to deal with resource shortage (trade-off between fault-tolerance and resource utilization).
- Set a higher replication factor for critical topics to improve durability and fault tolerance.

A tighter integration with Cruise Control is also one of the long term goals of the Strimzi project. 

## Proposal

The replication factor change feature can be implemented by integrating the Topic Operator with Cruise Control.
The Cluster Operator is already integrated with Cruise Control, so we can factor out the existing logic and classes.

Cruise Control creates a task for each operation, such as topic configuration and cluster rebalance.

> A task is first created in the Active state, then moves to InExecution, and finally to Completed or CompletedWithError.

Reviewer 4: The fact that it's called `Active`, but is distinct from `InExecution` is pretty confusing. It seems like `Active` would be better called `Pending`, since it's just sitting in a queue, right?

Author: Agreed, but this is Cruise Control internal terminology. I map both Active and InExecution to pending, because this is how they look like from the Strimzi user point of view.

At most `max.active.user.tasks` tasks can be Active at the same time (5 by default), and only one task can be InExecution at any given time.

During the execution, a task is divided in one or more batches, which are then executed one after the other.

> A task may affect multiple topics, which complete or fail altogether.

Reviewer 4: This could do with a little elaboration, given the batching mentioned in the previous sentence. I assume you mean:

```suggestion
If any batch fails then the task becomes `CompletedWithError` potentially leaving some topics in a changed state and others unchanged.
```

Author: Ok.

A completed task is retained for `completed.user.task.retention.time.ms`, which defaults to 24 hours.

### Topic configuration

The [`topic_configuration`](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/REST-APIs#change-kafka-topic-configuration) endpoint will be used to request replication factor changes.

> Once accepted, the replication factor change is put into the Cruise Control's task queue and executed asynchronously.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Once accepted, the replication factor change is put into the Cruise Control's task queue and executed asynchronously with respect to the sending of the HTTP response to the request that initiated the change. 
```

    "excludedBrokersForReplicaMove": [],
    "excludedBrokersForLeadership": [],
    "provisionStatus": "RIGHT_SIZED",
    "onDemandBalancednessScoreBefore": 100,
    "recentWindows": 5,
    "dataToMoveMB": 0,
    "excludedTopics": [],
    "numLeaderMovements": 0
  }
  ...
```

The `skip_rack_awareness_check` parameter configures whether to skip the rack awareness sanity check or not (default to false).
If rack awareness is not enabled in Strimzi, the `skip_rack_awareness_check` will be set to true.

The `goals` parameter is a comma separated list of goals used to generate the automatic cluster rebalance for the replication factor change.
This is configurable for all endpoints in `Kafka.spec.cruiseControl.config` using the `default.goals` property.

The `replication_throttle` parameter is an upper bound on the bandwidth used to move replicas (bytes per second).
This is configurable for all endpoints in `Kafka.spec.cruiseControl.config` using the `default.replication.throttle` property.

### User tasks

The [`user_tasks`](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/REST-APIs#query-the-user-request-result) endpoint will be used to periodically check the state of requested tasks.

> The only required parameter is the `User-Task-ID`, which is returned by the `topic_configuration` response.

Reviewer 4: You should mention that this endpoint supports batching (`user_task_ids` is a comma-separated list).

Author: I did at some point. Let me add it back.

The `replicasChange` can be in a pending or ongoing `state`, and it can contain a `message` in case of failure.
Other fields are `sessionId`, which maps to Cruise Control's `User-Task-ID`, and `targetReplicas`, which reflects the target replicas value (this may be different from .spec.replicas when the state is ongoing).

- **Pending**: Not in Cruise Control's task queue (not yet sent or request error).
  Cruise Control's task states: None.
  ```sh
  status:
    conditions:
    - lastTransitionTime: "2024-01-18T16:13:50.490918232Z"
      status: "True"
      type: Ready
    observedGeneration: 2
    replicasChange:
      state: pending
      targetReplicas: 2
    topicName: my-topic
  ```

- **Ongoing**: In Cruise Control's task queue, but execution not started, or not completed. 
  Cruise Control's task states: Active, InExecution.
  ```sh
  status:
    conditions:
    - lastTransitionTime: "2024-01-18T16:13:53.490918232Z"
      status: "True"
      type: Ready
    observedGeneration: 3
    replicasChange:
      sessionId: 1aa418ca-53ed-4b93-b0a4-58413c4fc0cb
      state: ongoing
      targetReplicas: 2
    topicName: my-topic
  ```

> - **Completed**: Cruise Control's task execution completed (target replication factor reconciled).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- **Completed**: Cruise Control's task execution completed (target replication factor reconciled). This is characterised by the absence of a `status.replicasChange`
```

  Cruise Control's task states: Completed.
  ```sh
  status:
    conditions:
    - lastTransitionTime: "2024-01-18T16:13:58.490918232Z"
      status: "True"
      type: Ready
    observedGeneration: 4
    topicName: my-topic
  ```

- **Failed**: Cruise Control's request failed, the change remains pending, and it is periodically retried.
  Cruise Control's task states: CompletedWithError.
  ```sh
  status:
    conditions:
    - lastTransitionTime: "2024-01-18T16:13:58.490918232Z"
      status: "True"
      type: Ready
    observedGeneration: 4
    replicasChange:
      message: Change request failed, Cluster model not ready
      state: pending
      targetReplicas: 2
    topicName: my-topic
  ```

> 

Reviewer 4: I don't know if you want to include a diagram showing the allowed transitions. IIUC it would look like this:

```
+-->  Pending
|      |
|      V
|     Ongoing <------> Failed
|      |                |
|      V                |
+---- Completed <-------+
```

### Reconciliation logic

At runtime, the Topic Operator watches and periodically reconciles the configuration of all managed and unpaused KafkaTopic resources.
Among the other configurations, the reconciliation logic detects `.spec.replicas` changes in KafkaTopic resources by comparing with the topic replication factor value in Kafka.

A ReplicasChangeClient will be used to isolate the logic required to call the Cruise Control REST API from the rest of the reconciliation logic.

> The ReplicasChangeClient will support sending multiple replicas changes with a single request, and checking multiple tasks with a single request.

Reviewer 4: It might be worth noting that we don't expect to need to limit the number of topics in these requests because of the batching the CC does internally.

On every reconciliation loop, when Cruise Control integration will be enabled and replicas changes are detected, the BatchingTopicController will use the ReplicasChangeClient for the following operations:

> 1. Request pending replicas changes (uses `topic_configuration` endpoint, and returns topics with pending and ongoing changes).

Reviewer 4: Somewhere you should describe the error case where we've filled up CC's internal queue. AFAICS what you're describing will work fine (assuming CC returns some error response in this situation): We'll eventually retry and work through the backlog of `KafkaTopics`.

Author: It is like you say. I have the following row, let me know if it's enough.

> Another temporary example is the `RuntimeException` when Cruise Control's task queue is full.

2. Check ongoing replicas changes (uses `user_tasks` endpoint, and returns topics with completed changes).

The result of these operations will be used to update the KafkaTopic status.

### Error handling

> In case of error, the replicas change will remain pending or ongoing (no status update), and will be indefinitely retried by the periodic reconciliation.

Reviewer 4: I didn't understand this part: You described a `Failed` state, but you don't seem to use it here.

Author: I see why it is confusing. The failed state is reported as an error message. The change remains pending so that it can be retried periodically. Proposal updated.

There is little benefit in using the `stop_proposal_execution` endpoint, because most replicas change tasks have only one batch that can't be stopped.
No task remains hanging, the only problem is that Cruise Control does some unnecessary work executing a batch for a topic that has been deleted.

When a managed topic with replicas change is deleted in Kafka, the Topic Operator will recreate the topic with the target replication factor.

When Topic Operator is restarted, both pending and ongoing replicas changes will be recovered from the KafkaTopic status.
The ongoing state will include a `sessionId`, which is the unique identifier of a Cruise Control task, which includes one or more replicas changes.

When Cruise Control is restarted, all active tasks are lost because there is no persistent memory.
The Topic Operator will detect this event when the ongoing changes check returns no tasks for a known `sessionId`.
All pending and ongoing replicas changes will still be stored in KafkaTopic status, and new tasks will be created as soon as Cruise Control becomes ready.

> 

Reviewer 4: Should we update the CRD with an `AdditionalPrinterColumn` for the `status.replicasChange.state`?

Author: Given it's a temporary state, I'm not sure we need this.

The total number of partition replicas, including the leader, constitutes the replication factor.

The replication factor is configured at the topic level, and can be used to enable strong durability and fault tolerance.
When the Kafka cluster is healthy and a broker is down, another one can serve the data of topics with replication factor greater than one.
A tradeoff is that each topic partition will take up an amount of storage equal to its size times the replication factor value.
The cluster `default.replication.factor` configuration is used when a new topic is created without specifying the replication factor.

When new messages arrive, they are first written into the operating system's page cache, and then flushed to disk asynchronously.
If the Kafka JVM crashes for whatever reason, recent messages are still in the page cache, and can be flushed by the operating system.
However, this doesn't protect from data loss when the machine crashes, and this is why enabling topic replication is important.
To further improve fault tolerance, a rack-aware Kafka cluster can be used to distribute topic replicas evenly across data centers in the same geographic region.

> Once a topic is created, it is possible to change its replication factor using a command line tool.

Author: It is mentioned few line below, in the current situation section, along with a link to the Strimzi documentation.

### Topic configuration

The [`topic_configuration`](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/REST-APIs#change-kafka-topic-configuration) endpoint will be used to request replication factor changes.
Once accepted, the replication factor change is put into the Cruise Control's task queue and executed asynchronously with respect to the sending of the HTTP response to the request that initiated the change.

The two required parameters for this endpoint are `topic` (regular expression to specify subject topics) and `replication_factor` (target replication factor).
In order to group multiple changes in the same request to Cruise Control, the Topic Operator uses a [JSON payload](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/Change-topic-replication-factor-through-Cruise-Control#instruction), which replaces the required parameters.
This JSON contains a list of replication factor values, each one associated with a regex expression of the form `topic1|topic2|topic3` matching all topics with that target replication factor.

This is useful with bulk replicas change, which can happen in some edge cases.

> A potentially big backlog of changes may be created when the Topic Operator is not running, or there is an issue with Cruise Control or Kafka.

Reviewer 5: If that's what we want to say, is it clear that this a potential drawback when making bulk changes? Or are we saying that the infrastructure must be capable of handling the bulk changes?

Author: The infrastructure must be capable of handling the bulk changes.

< Date: Thu, 07 Dec 2023 14:58:55 GMT
< Set-Cookie: JSESSIONID=node0lfkx183ijq4pjkkjahsegfmp30.node0; Path=/
< Expires: Thu, 01 Jan 1970 00:00:00 GMT
< User-Task-ID: 5344ca89-351f-4565-8d0f-9aade00e053d
< Content-Type: application/json;charset=utf-8
< Cruise-Control-Version: 2.5.77-SNAPSHOT
< Cruise-Control-Commit_Id: 535ea07e8847990cc02dde1f1be99b387dbeaf5b
< Content-Length: 17051
< Server: Jetty(9.4.52.v20230823)
< 
{ [17321 bytes data]
{
  "summary": {
    "numIntraBrokerReplicaMovements": 0,
    "numReplicaMovements": 125,
    "onDemandBalancednessScoreAfter": 100,
    "intraBrokerDataToMoveMB": 0,
    "monitoredPartitionsPercentage": 100,
    "provisionRecommendation": "",
    "excludedBrokersForReplicaMove": [],
    "excludedBrokersForLeadership": [],
    "provisionStatus": "RIGHT_SIZED",
    "onDemandBalancednessScoreBefore": 100,
    "recentWindows": 5,
    "dataToMoveMB": 0,
    "excludedTopics": [],
    "numLeaderMovements": 0
  }
  ...
```

The `skip_rack_awareness_check` parameter configures whether to skip the rack awareness sanity check or not (default to false).
If rack awareness is not enabled in Strimzi, the `skip_rack_awareness_check` will be set to true.

> The `goals` parameter is a comma separated list of goals used to generate the automatic cluster rebalance for the replication factor change.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The `goals` parameter is a comma-separated list of goals used to generate the automatic cluster rebalance for the replication factor change.
```

This is configurable for all endpoints in `Kafka.spec.cruiseControl.config` using the `default.goals` property.

The `replication_throttle` parameter is an upper bound on the bandwidth used to move replicas (bytes per second).
This is configurable for all endpoints in `Kafka.spec.cruiseControl.config` using the `default.replication.throttle` property.

### User tasks

The [`user_tasks`](https://github.com/linkedin/cruise-control/wiki/REST-APIs#query-the-user-request-result) endpoint will be used to periodically check the state of requested tasks.

> The only required parameter is the `user_task_ids`, which is a comma separated list of `User-Task-ID` returned by the topic configuration requests.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The only required parameter is the `user_task_ids`, which is a comma-separated list of `User-Task-ID` values returned by the topic configuration requests.
```

```sh
$ curl -s "localhost:9090/kafkacruisecontrol/user_tasks?user_task_ids=5344ca89-351f-4565-8d0f-9aade00e053d,8911ca89-351f-888-8d0f-9aade00e098h&json=true" | jq
{
  "userTasks": [
    {
      "Status": "Completed",
      "ClientIdentity": "127.0.0.1",
      "RequestURL": "POST /kafkacruisecontrol/topic_configuration?topic=my-topic&replication_factor=2&skip_rack_awareness_check=true&dryrun=false&json=true",
      "UserTaskId": "5344ca89-351f-4565-8d0f-9aade00e053d",
      "StartMs": "1701961135978"
    },
    {
      "Status": "Active",
      "ClientIdentity": "127.0.0.1",
      "RequestURL": "POST /kafkacruisecontrol/topic_configuration?topic=my-topic&replication_factor=3&skip_rack_awareness_check=true&dryrun=false&json=true",
      "UserTaskId": "8911ca89-351f-888-8d0f-9aade00e098h",
      "StartMs": "1701961136014"
    }
  ],
  "version": 1
}
```

### Configuration parameters

The Topic Operator will need to authenticate and send HTTP requests to the Cruise Control's REST API.
A new admin user will be provisioned for the Topic Operator, separate from the credentials used by the KafkaRebalanceOperator.

> The following environment variables will be set by the Cluster Operator for consumption by the Topic Operator when Cruise Control is configured in Kafka resource, or manually by the user in case of standalone deployment:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The following environment variables will be set by the Cluster Operator for consumption by the Topic Operator when Cruise Control is configured in the Kafka resource, or manually by the user in case of standalone deployment:
```

|:--------------------------------------|---------|---------|---------------------------------------------------------------|
| STRIMZI_CRUISE_CONTROL_ENABLED        | Boolean | false   | Whether Cruise Control integration is enabled                 |
| STRIMZI_CRUISE_CONTROL_RACK_ENABLED   | Boolean | false   | Whether rack awareness is enabled in the target Kafka cluster |
| STRIMZI_CRUISE_CONTROL_HOSTNAME       | String  | ""      | Cruise Control hostname                                       |
| STRIMZI_CRUISE_CONTROL_PORT           | Integer | 9090    | Cruise Control port                                           |
| STRIMZI_CRUISE_CONTROL_SSL_ENABLED    | Boolean | false   | Whether SSL encryption is enabled                             |
| STRIMZI_CRUISE_CONTROL_AUTH_ENABLED   | Boolean | false   | Whether Basic authentication is enabled                       |

With the Cluster Operator deployment, the certificate chain in PEM format and the admin user credentials for the Cruise Control REST API will be automatically mounted in the Topic Operator container.

> Instead, with the standalone deployment, the user will have to mount: certificate chain in `/etc/tls-sidecar/cluster-ca-certs/ca.crt`, credentials in `/etc/eto-cc-api/topic-operator.apiAdminName` and `/etc/eto-cc-api/topic-operator.apiAdminPassword`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Whereas in the the standalone deployment, the user will have to mount: certificate chain in `/etc/tls-sidecar/cluster-ca-certs/ca.crt`, credentials in `/etc/eto-cc-api/topic-operator.apiAdminName`, and `/etc/eto-cc-api/topic-operator.apiAdminPassword`.
```

### KafkaTopic CRD changes

During the whole replicas change process the KafkaTopic will remain in a ready state.
A replicas change will be executed asynchronously, taking more than one reconciliation to complete.

A new optional KafkaTopicStatus subsection called `replicasChange` will be used to update the user, and keep track of the replicas change state.
The `replicasChange` can be in a pending or ongoing `state`, and it can contain a `message` in case of failure.

> Other fields are `sessionId`, which maps to Cruise Control's `User-Task-ID`, and `targetReplicas`, which reflects the target replicas value (this may be different from .spec.replicas when the state is ongoing).

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Other fields are `sessionId`, which maps to Cruise Control's `User-Task-ID`, and `targetReplicas`, which reflects the target replicas value (this may be different from `.spec.replicas` when the state is ongoing).
```

      type: Ready
    observedGeneration: 4
    topicName: my-topic
  ```

- **Failed**: Cruise Control's request failed, the change remains pending, and it is periodically retried.
  Cruise Control's task states: CompletedWithError.
  ```sh
  status:
    conditions:
    - lastTransitionTime: "2024-01-18T16:13:58.490918232Z"
      status: "True"
      type: Ready
    observedGeneration: 4
    replicasChange:
      message: Change request failed, Cluster model not ready
      state: pending
      targetReplicas: 2
    topicName: my-topic
  ```

### Reconciliation logic

At runtime, the Topic Operator watches and periodically reconciles the configuration of all managed and unpaused KafkaTopic resources.
Among the other configurations, the reconciliation logic detects `.spec.replicas` changes in KafkaTopic resources by comparing with the topic replication factor value in Kafka.

A ReplicasChangeClient will be used to isolate the logic required to call the Cruise Control REST API from the rest of the reconciliation logic.
The ReplicasChangeClient will support sending multiple replicas changes with a single request, and checking multiple tasks with a single request.

> On every reconciliation loop, when Cruise Control integration will be enabled and replicas changes are detected, the BatchingTopicController will use the ReplicasChangeClient for the following operations:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
On every reconciliation loop, when Cruise Control integration is enabled and replicas changes are detected, the BatchingTopicController will use the ReplicasChangeClient for the following operations:
```

1. Request pending replicas changes (uses `topic_configuration` endpoint, and returns topics with pending and ongoing changes).
2. Check ongoing replicas changes (uses `user_tasks` endpoint, and returns topics with completed changes).

The result of these operations will be used to update the KafkaTopic status.

### Error handling

In case of error, the error message will be added to the KafkaTopic status and printed in logs, but the replicas change will remain pending or ongoing, and will be indefinitely retried by the periodic reconciliation.

In Cruise Control, there is no way to differentiate between temporary errors (resolve by themself) from permanent errors (require some action).
For example, the `NotEnoughValidWindowsException` can be raised when Cruise Control has just started and the cluster model is still building, but also when there is a configuration error which prevents broker metrics collection.
A similar example is the `OptimizationFailureException` raised when some hard goal is violated, which can be temporary if the configured network capacity is less than the real network capacity and there is a traffic peak.

> Instead, the `OngoingExecutionException` is clearly temporary, and it means that a task execution was attempted while there is already one that is being executed by Cruise Control.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The `OngoingExecutionException` is clearly temporary, and it means that a task execution was attempted while there is already one that is being executed by Cruise Control.
```

Another temporary example is the `RuntimeException` when Cruise Control's task queue is full.

> Cruise Control allows to scale down the replication factor under the `min.insync.replicas` value, and this can cause disruption to producers with `acks=all`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Cruise Control allows scale down of the replication factor under the `min.insync.replicas` value, which can cause disruption to producers with `acks=all`.
```

When this happens, the Topic Operator won't block the operation, but will just log a warning, because the KafkaRoller ignores topics with RF < minISR, and they don't even show up as under replicated in Kafka metrics.
The target replication factor should also be less than or equal to the number of available brokers, but this is enforced directly by Cruise Control.

> When a managed KafkaTopic with replicas change is deleted in Kubernetes, the Topic Operator will also delete the topic in Kafka, but the current batch execution will continue in Cruise Control.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
When a managed KafkaTopic with a replicas change is deleted in Kubernetes, the Topic Operator will also delete the topic in Kafka, but the current batch execution will continue in Cruise Control.
```

There is little benefit in using the `stop_proposal_execution` endpoint, because most replicas change tasks have only one batch.

> When a managed topic with replicas change is deleted in Kafka, the Topic Operator will recreate the topic with the target replication factor.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
When a managed topic with a replicas change is deleted in Kafka, the Topic Operator will recreate the topic with the target replication factor.
```

### Cluster Operator

This component will be responsible to initialize the environment variables, and mount the Cruise Control API secret.

Mounting the existing Cruise Control API secret into the Topic Operator would require to always deploy Cruise Control before the Topic Operator, creating a strong dependency between these two components.
To avoid that, the Topic Operator will create it's own API secret containing a dedicated admin username and password, while Cruise Control will add the secret content to its API credentials store.

> This logic will be triggered only when they are both part of the KafkaTopic resource.

Author: Ok.
